Smith, S., Jaszczak, A., Graber, J., Lundeen, K., Leitsch, S., Wargo, E., & O'Muircheartaigh, C. (2009). Instrument development, study design implementation, and survey conduct for the national social
life, health, and aging project. Journal of Gerontology: Social Sciences, 64B(S1), i20­i29, doi:10.1093/geronb/gbn013.
© The Author 2008. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of The Gerontological Society of America.
All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org.
i20
THE National Opinion Research Center (NORC), led by
a team of investigators at the University of Chicago,
conducted more than 3,000 interviews during 2005 and
2006 with a nationally representative sample of adults aged
57­85 years. Face-to-face interviews and biomeasure col-
lection took place in respondents' homes. Data collection
elicited (a) demographic characteristics, (b) social networks,
(c) social and cultural activity, (d) physical and mental
health including cognition, (e) well-being, (f) illness, (g)
medications and alternative therapies, (h) history of sexual
and intimate partnerships, and (i) patient­physician com-
munication. The National Social Life, Health, and Aging
Project (NSHAP) also collected important health informa-
tion in the home, prioritizing noninvasive collection tech-
niques and cutting edge technology that minimizes
respondent burden. The NSHAP interview included the col-
lection of 13 biomeasures: weight, waist circumference,
height, blood pressure, smell, saliva collection, taste, a self-
administered vaginal swab for female respondents, "Get Up
and Go," distance vision, touch, oral mucosal transudate
(OMT; Orasure Technologies/Inc, Bethlehem, PA) test for
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), and blood spots.
NSHAP grew from a history of survey research in health
and aging. Prior to NSHAP, data documenting the sexual prac-
tices of persons older than 57 years, using representative sam-
ples of the United States, were limited. The National Health
and Social Life Survey (NHSLS; Laumann, Gagnon, Michael,
& Michaels, 1994; Laumann & Michael, 2001) and the Chi-
cago Health and Social Life Survey (CHSLS; Laumann, El-
lingson, Mahay, Paik, & Youm, 2004) gathered data from
probability-based representative samples of adult households,
aged 18­59 years, in 1992 and 1995­1997, respectively. These
surveys laid the methodological groundwork for NSHAP.
Building on methodology and lessons learned from the
NHSLS and the CHSLS, this article describes how the com-
plex design described in the article by O'Muircheartaigh in
this issue was operationalized with the development of the
NSHAP Wave I instruments, protocols, and the administra-
tion of field operations. Table 1 highlights the important
milestone field dates from the start of the project through to
the end of data collection.
Methods
The NSHAP team faced considerable challenges in de-
veloping the instruments and protocols required for the col-
lection of questionnaire and biomeasure data. This section
of the article describes how the team successfully integrated
each of these components so that the data were collected
efficiently, cost-effectively, and with appropriate quality.
Instrument and Biomeasure Protocol Development
NSHAP Wave I administration consisted of an in-home
questionnaire, biomeasure collection, and a self-adminis-
tered postinterview or "leave-behind" questionnaire. All
questionnaires and survey materials were developed in Eng-
lish and translated into Spanish.
Development process for the questionnaire.--The re-
search staff met regularly over the course of several months
Instrument Development, Study Design Implementation,
and Survey Conduct for the National Social Life, Health,
and Aging Project
Stephen Smith,1 Angela Jaszczak,1 Jessica Graber,3 Katie Lundeen,1 Sara Leitsch,1 Erin Wargo,1
and Colm O'Muircheartaigh1,2
1National Opinion Research Center at the University of Chicago, Illinois.
2The Harris School of Public Policy, University of Chicago, Illinois.
3Formerly with NORC, now with National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, Bethesda, Maryland.
The National Opinion Research Center, led by a team of investigators at the University of Chicago, conducted more
than 3,000 in-person interviews with a nationally representative sample of adults aged 57­85 years. Data collection
included in-person questionnaire items, an extensive array of biomeasures, and a postinterview self-administered
questionnaire. The National Social Life, Health, and Aging Project (NSHAP) interview included the collection of 13
biomeasures: weight, waist circumference, height, blood pressure, smell, saliva collection, taste, a self-administered
vaginal swab for female respondents, "Get Up and Go," distance vision, touch, oral mucosal transudate (Orasure®)
human immunodeficiency virus test, and blood spots. This article discusses the development of NSHAP's instruments
and implementation of the study design. Measures, such as response and cooperation rates, are also provided to
evaluate the effectiveness of the design and implementation.
Key Words: NSHAP--Survey--Aging--Health--Biomeasures.
INSTRUMENT DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION FOR NSHAP i21
to determine the measurement domains necessary to ad-
dress the specific aims of the project. Once measurement
domains were chosen, research staff conducted thorough
reviews of relevant literature and contacted substantive ex-
perts to determine if existing instruments could be used,
how much time the instrument took to administer, and va-
lidity and reliability of the instrument. If no existing instru-
ment could be found, questions were developed specifically
for the project.
A small pretest of the questionnaire and biomeasures
procedures was conducted from July to September 2004
with 53 respondents. Unfortunately, the results of the pre-
test indicated that the in-home administration was taking
significantly longer time to complete than the planned 2 hr.
There were anecdotal reports of some interviews taking in
excess of 4 hr to complete. Consequently, the questionnaire
was subjected to a series of cuts, and the remaining ques-
tionnaire domains were prioritized according to the specific
aims of the project. Any domain that was considered not
essential to these aims was either cut completely or modu-
larized (details of this modularization are provided subse-
quently). The questionnaire sections and domains for the
in-home interview are shown in Table 2.
Although most of the in-person questionnaire sections were
administered by the field interviewer, a small subset of ques-
tions was determined to be sensitive enough to warrant self-
administration (fifth section in Table 2). These questions
included the number of lifetime sexual partners (both male and
female), lifetime use of prostitutes, frequency of masturbation,
frequency of urinary problems, and stool incontinence.
Development process for the biomeasures.--The integra-
tion of biomeasures into the NSHAP study design enhanced
the study's scientific objectives in three major ways. First,
biomeasures permit estimation of the incidence and preva-
lence among older adults of certain diseases (e.g., bacterial
vaginosis [BV], human papilloma virus [HPV]). Second,
they permit the detection of undiagnosed or subclinical con-
ditions such as hypertension and diabetes that may have a
potent effect on sexual function and/or overall well-being.
Third, they provide objective measures of health status (e.g.,
height, weight, vision) for use in conjunction with self-
reported measures.
Biomeasure collection and shipping procedures were col-
laboratively developed over several years as part of a unique
interdisciplinary NSHAP biomeasure working group. Because
Table 2. NSHAP Wave I Questionnaire Sections and Domains
Section Domains
Basic background
information
Gender
Age
Education
Race/ethnicity
Social networks and
social support
Roster
Support from partner
Support from family and friends
Children and grandchildren
Elder mistreatment
Sex Marriage/cohabitation/sexual partner histories
Sexual interest
Current or most recent sexual relationship
Physical health Self-reported health
Sensory function
Surgeries and procedures
Health care utilization
Morbidity
Sexually transmitted infections
Fertility and menopause
Functional health
Medical decision maker
Health-related behaviors
Cognition
Self-administered
questionnaire
Sexual practices and attitudes
Incontinence
Biomeasures Weight
Waist
Height
Blood pressure
Smell
Saliva and medications
Taste
Vaginal swabs
Orasure
Distance vision
Get up and go
Touch
Blood spots
Mental health Happiness and life satisfaction
Depression
Anxiety
Stress
Employment and finances Respondent employment
Partner's employment
Household income
Household assets
Religion Religion
Physical contact Physical contact
Interviewer comments Characteristics and location of interview
Respondent's functional health and behavior
Description of respondent
Description of location
Respondent's neighborhood and home
Core leave-behind section Social relationships and activities
Caregiving
Sexual attitudes and victimization
Health
STI susceptibility
Patient­physician communication
Alcohol consumption
Military service
Incarceration
Relative income
Loneliness
Neighborhood relationships
Internet use
Political affiliation
Note: NSHAP = National Social Life, Health, and Aging Project.
Table 1. Overview of NSHAP Wave I Data Collection Timeline
Project funding start September 2003
Pretest field period July to September 2004
Field training dates
Field Interviewer Training 1 June 2005
Field Interviewer Training 2 July 2005
Field Interviewer Training 3 August 2005
Field data collection period July 2005 to March 2006
Note: NSHAP = National Social Life, Health, and Aging Project.
SMITH ET AL.
i22
many existing protocols for collecting biomeasures were
based on clinical or laboratory administration, the working
group focused on ensuring that the measures were univer-
sally collectable in the home setting. Primary considerations
included (a) adaptability to in-home collection and ship-
ping, (b) adaptability to lay administration, (c) adaptability
to the target population, (d) choosing portable, reliable,
valid, and economical equipment, and (e) evaluating the im-
pact of interviewer and respondent burden (for each mea-
sure and the sum of all measures in the interview).
The range of biomeasures collected in NSHAP represents
a balance between the scientific value of the data, minimally
invasive techniques accepted by respondents, practical con-
siderations of implementation, and budget constraints. The
pretest provided invaluable data and experience that showed
that the collection of high-quality biomeasure data was pos-
sible using nonmedically trained interviewers; but it also
showed that some of the protocols required streamlining or
exclusion from the main data collection to improve admin-
istration efficiency and reduce respondent burden. Weigh-
ing the main aims of the study with the target time of around
2 hr spent in the home conducting the interview, the NS-
HAP research team agreed that the assessments of hearing,
lung function (peak flow), mobility (chair stand), glucose
test and toxicology (urine collection) should be dropped
from Wave I administration.
A total of 13 biomeasures were collected for the first
wave of the study:
Weight
·
Waist circumference
·
Height
·
Blood pressure/pulse
·
Smell
·
Saliva collection (for cotinine, dehydroepiandrosterone
·
[DHEA], testosterone, progesterone, and estradiol)
Taste
·
Get Up and Go test of mobility
·
Distance vision
·
Touch
·
OMT test for HIV (using Orasure
· ®)
Blood spots (for C-reactive protein [CRP], Epstein­
·
Barr virus [EBV], hemoglobin, and hemoglobin A1c)
Vaginal swab (self-administered) for female respon-
·
dents (for BV, yeast vaginitis, and HPV)
Modularization of the Questionnaire and Biomeasures
As discussed, the pretest had shown that although the col-
lection of comprehensive questionnaire items and an exten-
sive range of biomeasures was feasible, the respondent
burden and potential financial costs of the fieldwork were
considered unacceptable. To decrease respondent burden
and minimize in-home interview time while maximizing
the analytic content of the interview, the NSHAP interview
was modularized. All respondents received a set of core
interview and biomeasure items. Five modules were devel-
oped: Two modules contained survey questions and three
modules included the collection of biomeasures. Respon-
dents were randomly assigned to one of six paths containing
a set of these modules. Respondents assigned to paths where
modularized interview questions were not asked were in-
stead given a mail-in self-administered questionnaire that
included these items. Figure 1 depicts the content of each
randomly assigned path (note that this figure does not repre-
sent the order in which the questions were asked).
The modularized questions were asked based on which
one of the six paths the interview had been randomly
assigned. Modules A and B were questionnaire modules.
Module A contained items on support from family and
friends, elder mistreatment, and nonsexual physical contact.
Module B contained items on children and grandchildren,
sexual interest, health care utilization, sexually transmitted
infections, and medical decision makers. If a respondent did
not receive Module A or B during the in-person interview,
he or she received these items in the self-administered,
postinterview questionnaire. Modules C, D, and E were
biomeasure modules: Module C contained blood spot col-
lection; Module D contained the Orasure® test (for HIV);
and Module E contained the vision, touch assessments, and
the Get Up and Go test of mobility and balance. Question-
naire items on perceived taste, touch, and smell were asked
of respondents in Module E during the in-person interview
but were omitted erroneously from the postinterview ques-
tionnaire provided to others.
Questionnaire Administration and Management
The main portion of the in-home NSHAP interview was
conducted in English or Spanish using a Computer-Assisted
Personal Interview (CAPI) questionnaire developed using
SPSS' mrInterview (Version 2.2). The software accommo-
dated the complexity of the questionnaire but remained user-
friendly. The CAPI program controlled which questionnaire
and biomeasure modules were to be administered and which
of the postinterview questionnaires was to be given to the
respondent, so that the whole interview appeared to the in-
terviewer and the respondent as one continuous smooth pro-
cess. As described earlier, there were several questions that
were considered particularly sensitive, so respondents were
offered the choice of completing this series in one of two
ways: reading the question text on the laptop computer and
entering responses directly into the CAPI program or read-
ing and answering the sensitive questions on a separate pa-
per-and-pencil questionnaire. To further maintain privacy,
these paper questionnaires were immediately sealed by the
interviewer in a separate envelope and returned (still sealed)
to NORC's production center for processing.
To decrease the occurrence of interviewer data entry errors,
both soft and hard range checks were programmed into the
CAPI instrument. CAPI-programmed range checks alert the
interviewer that an unlikely (soft check) or impossible (hard
INSTRUMENT DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION FOR NSHAP i23
check) response was entered. An impossible response, such
as entering a weight that is higher than the scale's maximum
measurable weight, cannot be entered into the CAPI, whereas
an unlikely response can be entered into CAPI once the inter-
viewer confirms it is correct. The interviewer instructions and
the data fields for collecting the in-home biomeasure re-
sponses were also incorporated into the CAPI interview.
Data Collection
Procedures were carefully designed for all aspects of the
NSHAP data collection including the sample frame and se-
lection, field staff preparations, informed consent, processes
to conduct the in-home interviews including the collection
of biomeasures, and the postinterview questionnaire. The
complexity of the interview required comprehensive and ef-
ficient protocols for all data collection tasks.
Field interviewer recruitment.--Running parallel to the
sample frame preparation and instrument development, the
field staff was planning for data collection. As is the case in
most field or telephone surveys, interviewers are often
the "face" of the project to respondents and are therefore
critical to its ultimate success. Consequently, NORC field
Figure 1. Overview of random path assignment and content in each path. FI = field interviewer.
SMITH ET AL.
i24
interviewers completed a rigorous recruitment process be-
fore being staffed on NSHAP. Recruitment began several
months prior to the start of data collection. All NORC field
interviewers were sent a letter explaining the details of NS-
HAP in order to let them know when the project would be
in the field. This letter helped to build enthusiasm for the
project as well as creating a list of interviewers who were
interested in working on NSHAP. Experienced interviewers
were staffed wherever possible and were evaluated on their
previous work and feedback from the field management
staff. Experienced interviewers also participated in a proj-
ect-based telephone interview. It was necessary to hire a
handful of new-to-NORC interviewers in areas where the
sampled areas did not overlap with areas in which NORC
had existing field staff. New hires completed in-person
mock interviews with field managers to evaluate their inter-
viewing skills and proficiency with computers.
All interviewers were evaluated to ensure that they were
comfortable asking questions about the sensitive issues ad-
dressed in the NSHAP interview. Because of the biomea-
sures included in the NSHAP study, the recruitment process
also focused on the ability and willingness of interviewers
to learn new skills. Potential interviewers were given fact
sheets about the biomeasures that they would be collecting
as well as information about storing and shipping biological
samples. In addition, they were also shown pictures of the
biomeasure collection techniques and when possible shown
the actual equipment used to collect the biomeasures. The
NSHAP project team wanted to make sure that interviewers
were comfortable with all the tasks they would be asked to
complete.
NSHAP hired both male and female interviewers, al-
though the majority of the field interviewing staff were fe-
male. Due to some sensitive questionnaire items and
biomeasures (e.g., self-administered vaginal swabs), only
female interviewers were allowed to interview female re-
spondents. Field management staff selected the most capa-
ble interviewers in their areas to comprise a national field
interviewing staff.
Field interviewer training.--Interviewer training included
the completion of a home study packet, a four-day in-person
training in Chicago, and booster trainings throughout data
collection. Over the summer of 2005, NORC conducted
three in-person trainings to prepare field interviewers to
administer the NSHAP questionnaire and biomeasures.
Having three training sessions allowed for smaller groups
and more interaction between interviewers and the trainers
in each of the training rooms. In total, 130 field interviewers
and 12 field managers completed the NSHAP training.
Prior to the in-person training, interviewers were required
to complete a home study packet that included reviewing
the training manual, watching a video demonstrating
biomeasure collection, and answering questions about the
project. Interviewers then attended an in-person training
that consisted of two project training days, a self-study day,
and a certification day. The two project trainings days were
taught through a series of brief lectures, hands-on practice
drills and mocks, and individual instruction.
Project training focused on (a) field operations and ad-
ministering the questionnaire and (b) collecting the biomea-
sures (Jaszczak, Lundeen, & Smith, 2009). Field operations
and questionnaire administration training included several
mock interviews to give the interviewers in-depth experi-
ence with the questionnaire. Interviewers also completed
modules addressing confidentiality, case management, gain-
ing cooperation, and refusal aversion. For biomeasure train-
ing, a standardized technique was used for each of the 13
measures: The trainer first would explain the collection pro-
cedure; the trainer would then demonstrate the collection
procedure with a "respondent"; and finally, the interviewer
would practice the collection procedure. The interviewer
practice step was an essential aspect of the training, and it
was repeated at multiple times during the in-person training
to enable the interviewer to become familiar and comfort-
able with the collection procedures. Individual and small
group feedback was integrated into this training process to
ensure correct collection techniques.
During the self-study day, interviewers rotated through a
series of modules that provided individual instruction from
trainers on such topics as blood spot collection and the ship-
ping of biological samples. The final day of training re-
quired interviewers to pass a certification interview. NSHAP
interviewers also had to complete at least one practice inter-
view after returning home before entering the field. Addi-
tionally, booster trainings were held by phone during data
collection to provide help with field efficiency and gaining
cooperation for the biomeasures. Selected field interviewers
participated in conference calls to address these issues.
The data collection began in a staggered format due to the
timings of the three training sessions. Once all three train-
ing sessions had been completed, the entire interviewing
staff was out in the field by mid-August 2005.
Gaining cooperation.--In an effort to show that the
project was a serious and scholarly undertaking, a conscious
decision was made to devote resources to developing a com-
prehensive set of high-quality project materials that had a
project logo and a consistent layout and color scheme. All
materials were tailored to meet the unique aspects of NS-
HAP. A series of respondent materials were developed to
introduce the project to the respondent and aid the inter-
viewers with gaining cooperation. Following standard prac-
tice in field studies, an advance letter was sent to the
respondent's home before the interviewer made the first
contact. The NSHAP pretest protocol included a very de-
tailed and informative advance letter. However, too much
information seemed to overwhelm the respondents, making
them less likely to participate. So a brief letter with limited
detail to introduce NSHAP was developed that allowed the
INSTRUMENT DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION FOR NSHAP i25
interviewer to explain the project in detail and provide ad-
ditional materials at the door.
At the first contact, interviewers were provided with an
array of tailored project materials to use as necessary to
address respondents' questions and concerns. Depending
on the respondent's questions or concerns, the interviewer
could provide any of the following materials: an NSHAP
brochure, examples of questions asked in NSHAP, a letter
to community authorities, a dossier that contained letters
of support and articles about the investigators' research,
a legitimacy handout, or the health information booklet
that showed the results they would receive from the
biomeasures.
If respondents were hesitant or initially refused, tailored
advance letters were mailed to them to address their con-
cerns. NSHAP created letters to address concerns for those
who were too busy, not interested, did not like surveys, were
worried about their privacy, did not like the government, did
not want to participate in the biomeasures, or their child/
spouse did not want them to participate. The $100 incentive
to participate in the study was also very beneficial in
gaining the cooperation of many respondents; although in
the following, we discuss that the incentive was increased
in the closing stages of the fieldwork to help boost the re-
sponse rate. Interviewers also had great success in using
small "in-kind" gifts such as small potted plants, a pumpkin
(at Halloween), or gift cards.
Field managers worked very closely with the interview-
ers to help develop strategies for each individual case. The
number and type of contact an interviewer made with a re-
spondent varied greatly depending on the case. Interviewers
and field management staff read through call notes from
previous attempts to determine the best time of day to con-
tact the respondent, what concerns they had, and any other
relevant information that would help them make a connec-
tion with the respondent. Sometimes it helped to send an-
other interviewer who had more similarities (e.g., race or
age) with the respondent. Having interviewers travel from
other regions to attempt the interview also proved to be very
successful. Respondents were sometimes more willing to
participate if the interviewer had a different accent or was
unique in some way.
Respondents had the right to refuse any of the biomea-
sures at any time during the interview process. Conse-
quently, gaining cooperation for each biomeasure was an
important part of the interviewer's job. The interviewers
used several gaining cooperation techniques to increase
biomeasure participation. Interviewers were thoroughly
trained to explain each biomeasure, address concerns, and
obtain consent throughout the interview. In addition,
biomeasures were completed during the latter half of the
interview when most respondents were engaged in the inter-
view, had already built a strong rapport with their field
interviewer, and recognized the importance of the data being
collected. In the final months of data collection, fieldwork
largely focused on refusal conversion. To increase the prob-
ability of converting these refusal cases and reach the goal of
completing 3,000 interviews, the following steps were taken:
(a) extend the end of the field period from December 2005
to March 2006, (b) mail a refusal conversion packet, (c)
form a refusal conversion team, (d) increase interviewer
traveling, and (e) increase the monetary incentive.
In December 2005, a refusal conversion packet was
mailed to potential respondents who had not completed
the interview. Anecdotally, the biggest concern respon-
dents were reporting was a need to verify the legitimacy of
the study. A one-page handout was developed addressing
issues of legitimacy and sent via FedEx with a letter signed
by the principal investigators and an NSHAP pen. It was
hoped that respondents would be more likely to open the
envelope by sending it FedEx and with a small trinket that
they could feel through the packaging. At the same time, a
group of talented NSHAP interviewers was also assem-
bled to become part of a national refusal conversion team.
Team members would contact respondents by telephone
and use their finely tuned gaining cooperation skills to at-
tempt to schedule interviews for local field interviewers to
complete.
The last refusal conversion effort was focused around in-
creasing the incentive amount offered to the respondent. To
ensure that the optimal incentive was offered that would fa-
cilitate participation in NSHAP, a split-ballot incentive ex-
periment was conducted (Wargo, Jaszczak, Smith, &
O'Muircheartaigh, 2007). A letter was sent via FedEx to a
random sample of finalized refusal cases offering either a
$200 or a $400 incentive. The letter also explained that the
respondents would not be contacted again; instead respon-
dents were provided with a toll-free number to schedule an
interview. The $200 incentive resulted in an approximately
2% conversion rate (i.e., approximately 2% of those offered
the $200 incentive then completed the interview). The $400
incentive resulted in an approximately 9% conversion rate.
Based on the results of the experiment, the $400 incentive
was offered to all remaining pending (i.e., in-scope but not
interviewed) cases. Ultimately, 221 respondents (7% of
those interviewed) received an increased incentive.
Results Notification for the Biomeasures
In addition to the monetary incentive, it was hoped that
the in-home collection of the biomeasures and being pro-
vided with the results would be viewed by the respondent as
an added benefit to participating in the study. Respondents
received results in two phases: (a) immediately following
the interview and (b) three weeks postinterview on a toll-
free, anonymous call-in system. The biomeasures that were
either experimental or not clinically validated (e.g., coti-
nine, DHEA, testosterone, progesterone, and estradiol from
saliva, and CRP, EBV, hemoglobin, and hemoglobin A1c
from blood spots) were not reported to respondents.
SMITH ET AL.
i26
At the end of the interview, interviewers provided re-
spondents with their height; weight; waist circumference;
blood pressure; pulse; and ratings for smell, taste, mobility,
vision, and touch. To provide these results, the interviewer
was instructed to copy the results from the CAPI screen to a
health information booklet that was left with the respon-
dent. Interviewers were told not to comment on these results
because they were not medically qualified to do so, but the
booklet did provide guidance on several measures, such as
whether their weight (using their body mass index) was be-
low, within, or above a healthy weight, and whether their
blood pressure was normal, prehypertension, or high.
The interviewers also provided respondents with infor-
mation on how to obtain results from the anonymous coun-
seling service for biomeasures that required additional
processing at a laboratory. Specifically, respondents were
given an identification number to access their results. To en-
sure anonymity and security, respondents were asked to cre-
ate a unique password and answer a verification question to
be used if they forgot their password. This call-in informa-
tion was provided only to individuals who were eligible to
receive laboratory results. To remind respondents to call for
their results, NORC sent respondents letters to inform them
that their results were ready.
NSHAP contracted with the American Social Health As-
sociation (ASHA) to provide anonymous counseling ser-
vices.ASHA provided respondents with test results for HIV,
BV, HPV, and yeast vaginitis; pretest and posttest result
counseling; materials; and referrals via a toll-free number.
The NSHAP call protocols used by ASHA counselors were
collaboratively created by ASHA and NSHAP researchers.
These protocols served as important tools and guidelines for
hotline staff to use during NSHAP calls. To protect the con-
fidentiality of the respondents, laboratory results were com-
municated to ASHA using de-identified respondent
identification numbers. A reconciliation system was devel-
oped to ensure that respondents' identification numbers and
laboratory results were received and matched accurately.
Shipping of the Biomeasure Specimens
Blood spots, OMT, vaginal swab, and saliva samples col-
lected for NSHAP were analyzed by several outside labora-
tories: Magee Women's Health Corporation, Northwestern
University's Department of Anthropology, Salimetrics, and
the University of Chicago's Institute of Mind and Biology.
Interviewers were responsible for storing, packing, and
shipping the samples to the respective laboratories. Each
interviewer was provided with detailed instructions on stor-
age and shipping requirements, which existed both for the
interviewers' safety and to maintain the integrity of the
sample. In particular, many samples had specific tempera-
ture requirements that had to be followed to ensure sample
quality; for example, to limit bacterial growth, the saliva
samples needed to be frozen as soon as possible after the
interview and needed to be shipped on dry ice to avoid them
thawing. All shipping protocols adhered to federal shipping
guidelines for the proper packing of diagnostic samples.
Quality Control of the Biomeasure Specimens
Careful monitoring of the biomeasures was performed to
ensure the quality of the data collected. Specifically, the
quality control measures included:
· Reconciliation. Throughout the data collection period,
NORC performed weekly reconciliation tasks to com-
pare laboratory data with questionnaire data indicating
whether or not a sample was collected. Tracking was
performed with an interactive reconciliation system that
allowed for the remote tracking of biological specimens
from the point of in-home collection through the deliv-
ery in the final data set. Anomalies were investigated
and resolved with the assistance of the field and labo-
ratory staff, field notes, laboratory sample requisition
forms, and FedEx tracking numbers.
· Laboratory sample quality. The quality of the samples
collected and delivered to outside laboratories for anal-
ysis was monitored throughout the data collection pe-
riod. NSHAP's laboratory subcontracting partners pro-
vided ongoing feedback on the quality of the specimens
received, including how they were collected, stored,
and shipped, as well as if the results of the analyses
fell within expected ranges. All four of the laboratories
that processed NSHAP specimens reported receiving
high-quality samples that were similar in quality and
outcomes to other studies.
Postinterview Questionnaire
At the end of the in-person interview, respondents were
given a paper-and-pencil postinterview questionnaire. Re-
spondents were asked to complete this questionnaire and
return it via U.S. mail in a provided postage-paid envelope.
The interviewers were instructed to not stay in the home
while the respondents completed this portion of the inter-
view. The self-administered questionnaires were designed
with simple instructions and few skip patterns and took ap-
proximately 30 min or less to complete. To encourage
completion, respondents were told that a portion of their
incentive payment (25%) was for completing and returning
the postinterview questionnaire. However, the full incentive
was paid at the time of the in-person interview, with written
documentation itemized to note this "prepayment."
After completing the in-person interview, most respon-
dents were fully engaged in NSHAP and were willing to
complete and mail in the postinterview questionnaire. Re-
spondents who had not returned their questionnaire within
three weeks of the in-person interview received a telephone
call from a member of the NSHAP field staff. These calls
served multiple functions including (a) thanking respondents
INSTRUMENT DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION FOR NSHAP i27
for their participation in NSHAP, (b) inquiring if the postint-
erview questionnaire had been returned, and (c) offering to
send a new version of the questionnaire if the original had
been misplaced.
The postinterview questionnaires were mailed to NORC's
production center where they were receipted and data cap-
tured. The receipt control process was specifically designed
to enable NORC staff to track the receipt of paper docu-
ments on a flow basis. Detailed specifications for computer-
assisted data entry were developed to ensure proper range
edits, skip patterns, and missing data flags, which all served
to prevent errors and promote data integrity. Ten percent of
the cases were reentered for verification and quality control
purposes.
Institutional Review Board Approval and Informed
Consent Procedures
Given the age of the study population, the collection of
biomeasure data, and the sensitive or personal nature of
some elements of the questionnaire, it was critical that pro-
tocols be developed to adequately protect the rights and
welfare of human subjects in the study.
Institutional review board approval.--Full approval was
granted for NSHAP from two institutional review boards
(IRBs): the Social and Behavioral Sciences Institutional Re-
view Board at the University of Chicago (the Federal Wide
Assurance [FWA] No. is FWA00005565) and the NORC
Institutional Review Board (FWA00000142).
National Institutes of Health Certificate of
confidentiality.--The NSHAP in-home interview included
sensitive information about physical and mental health, his-
tory of sexual and intimate partnerships, patient­physician
communication regarding intimacy and sexuality, sexual
function, behavior, desire, opportunity, and attitudes about
sexuality. Additionally, disease status was verified during
the biomeasure collection. For these reasons, the research-
ers obtained a Certificate of Confidentiality from the Na-
tional Institute on Aging to further protect the privacy of the
respondents (National Institutes of Health, 2003). With this
certificate, researchers cannot be forced to disclose infor-
mation that may identify respondents, even by a court sub-
poena, in any federal; state; or local civil, criminal,
administrative, legislative, or other proceedings.
Unique human subjects considerations.--The NSHAP
interview included components that made IRB approval dif-
ferent compared with most face-to-face interviews. Most
notably, the integration of biomeasures into the in-home in-
terview presented the researchers with unique human sub-
jects considerations.
Before the NSHAP interview could be conducted, it was
necessary for the interviewer to obtain informed consent
from the respondent. To reduce any real or perceived re-
spondent burden as well as to make the information con-
tained in the consent documents more salient to the different
questionnaire paths, the consent documentation process was
structured to reflect a continuous approach to informed con-
sent. The specific steps in the consent documentation pro-
cess were as follows:
Verification to read consent. At the beginning of the
interview, respondents were asked whether they would like
to read the Questionnaire and Physical Measures Consent
Form or have the interviewer read the form to them. To en-
sure that respondents did not receive information that did
not apply to them, separate male and female versions of the
consent form were used. The respondent was asked to sign
the consent form (a copy of the form was given to respon-
dents for their records).
Blood spot storage. During the results notification, re-
spondents who had provided a blood spot were given this
particular form indicating whether they consented to the
storage of their blood spots and, if so, whether or not they
would like to be contacted before any potential future anal-
ysis is conducted. The decision to offer respondents a choice
as to whether or not they would like to be notified before
beginning analysis on stored blood specimens was based
on our interpretation of the guidelines published by the
National Bioethics Advisory Commission's (1999) Research
Involving Human Biological Materials: Ethical Issues and
Policy Guidance, Vol. 1.
Call-in information. The final step of consent documen-
tation also occurred during results notification and applied
to respondents who provided an OMT and/or vaginal swab
sample during the interview. The purpose of the form was to
provide respondents with information about calling the toll-
free number to access their results. In addition, respondents
were asked to sign the form if they wanted to receive a re-
sults reminder letter.
The process of verbal consent continued throughout the
interview, and the interviewer always confirmed willingness
to participate in biomeasure collection prior to each assess-
ment. At any time, the respondent was able to seek and ob-
tain additional information regarding the questions or
measures or withdraw their consent.
To maintain respondent and data confidentiality after the
interview, the researchers instituted the use of an "honest bro-
ker" when dealing with the transmission of biological results.
Specifically, the honest broker was one individual and a small
number of directly supervised, trained assistants within
NORC who functioned to protect respondent confidentiality.
These specially designated individuals de-identified all data
prior to transferring them to the investigator team.
To further protect respondent confidentiality, steps were
taken to maintain the anonymity of the results from biologi-
cal assays. During the NSHAP interview, blood spots,
saliva, OMT, and vaginal swab samples collected from con-
senting respondents were labeled with unique identification
SMITH ET AL.
i28
numbers. These numbers provided no individually identifi-
able information to the laboratories. Samples were mailed
by interviewers directly to the appropriate laboratories and
labeled only with the unique identification number. Once
analysis of a specimen was completed, laboratories sent re-
sults with the unique identification number to NORC.
At the completion of the interview, NORC transmitted
the respondent's unique identification number, password,
and verification question to the results notification service
(ASHA). One laboratory sent HIV, HPV, yeast, and BV test
results with the unique identification number to the results
service. No personally identifying information was con-
tained in any transmittals. These results were then available
to the respondents on the anonymous call-in system two to
three weeks after the completion of the interview.
Results
The Wave I data collection began on July 6, 2005, and was
completed on March 31, 2006. Table 3 shows that 4,400 cases
were sampled for the study, of which 383 were classified af-
ter extensive field or central office enquiry as out of scope
(i.e., they did not meet the eligibility requirements for the
study). The two largest single categories for ineligibility were
deceased (which was 35% of all out-of-scope cases) and that
the sampled respondent was found to not be within the age
range for the study (15% of the out-of-scope cases). Of the
4,017 eligible cases, 3,005 were successfully interviewed--a
weighted response rate of 75.5% (using the American Asso-
ciation of Public Opinion Research [AAPOR], 2006, RR2
definition for calculating response rates). Field production
was strong at the start of data collection, and the refusal con-
version efforts implemented toward the end of data collec-
tion provided the final increase needed to surpass the original
response rate goal of 70%. Almost one quarter (24.0%
weighted) of the eligible cases were ultimately classified as
final refusals. Identifying the real reason for someone refus-
ing is sometimes difficult and often based on subjective as-
sessments by field staff, but the reported reasons for NSHAP
included that they were not interested in the study, or a gate-
keeper was blocking access on behalf of the respondent. The
remainder of the eligible cases (0.5%) had no contact (i.e.,
the field staff were confident that the respondent still resided
at the known address but were never able to talk with him/
her), had moved and field staff were unable to interview him/
her, or some other reason (e.g., the respondent's health was
too poor to complete the interview).
In addition to monitoring NSHAP's overall response rate
and focusing on refusal conversion, biomeasure coopera-
tion rates were monitored continuously during the field
period. As shown in Table 4, the cooperation rates (using
COOP3; AAPOR, 2006) were generally quite high, with 10
of the 13 measures achieving cooperation rates in excess of
90%--8 of the 10 rates were greater than 95%. Not surpris-
ingly, given the more invasive nature of the vaginal swab
and the physical challenge for some women to perform the
test, the request for self-administered vaginal swabs had the
lowest but still very respectable cooperation rate of 67.5%.
The other component of the data collection was the
postinterview paper questionnaire that was left with the re-
spondent to complete after the interviewer had completed
the in-home interview. Tracking the returns of these ques-
tionnaires showed that 64% were being returned. To help
boost the number of returned questionnaires, the field inter-
viewers were instructed to prompt respondents by telephone.
The telephone prompting increased the return rate by 20 per-
centage points so that the final response rate for the postint-
erview questionnaire was approximately 84%.
Table 3. NSHAP Final Sample Dispositions for Wave I
Disposition No. Cases (N = 4,400)
Total Sample (%) Eligible Cases (%)
Unweighted Weighted Unweighted Weighted
Interviewed 3,005 68.3 69.2 74.8 75.5
Final refusal 990 22.5 22.0 24.6 24.0
Unable to contact 9 0.2 0.1 0.2 0.2
Moved 3 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.1
Other 10 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2
Out of scope 383 8.7 8.3 - -
Total 4,400 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0
Note: NSHAP = National Social Life, Health, and Aging Project.
Table 4. NSHAP Biomeasure Cooperation Rates
Measure Cooperation Ratea (%) No. Eligible Respondents
Height 98.6 2,977
Touch 98.4 1,505
Weight 98.4 2,977
Blood pressure 98.4 3,004
Smell 98.3 3,004
Waist 97.2 3,004
Distance vision 96.0 1,505
Taste 95.9 3,004
Get up and go 93.6 1,485
Saliva 90.8 3,004
OMT 89.2 972
Blood spots 85.0 2,494
Vaginal swabs 67.5 1,550
Notes: NSHAP = National Social Life, Health, and Aging Project; OMT =
oral mucosal transudate.
a Person-level weights are adjusted for nonresponse by age and urbanicity.
INSTRUMENT DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION FOR NSHAP i29
Discussion
NSHAP's design required the administration of a 2-hr
questionnaire that included several sensitive items and the
collection of an extensive array of biomeasures by nonmed-
ical staff. A further challenge was a survey sample aged
57­85 years that encompassed a wide spectrum of individu-
als: those actively employed through to those who had been
retired for many years, and healthy individuals through to
those in poor health. The combination of these and other
factors presented many operational and methodological
challenges. To help ensure successful data outcomes, sig-
nificant attention was given to all study design elements in-
cluding human subjects considerations, questionnaire
design and programming, interviewer recruitment and train-
ing, and the development of all survey materials. The survey
response rate, biomeasure cooperation rates, and the postint-
erview questionnaire return rate appear to suggest that these
efforts were successful.
Additionally, NSHAP presented unique field challenges.
Although the project was challenging for field staff, it also
proved to be a satisfying experience. In particular, the inclu-
sion of the biomeasures added a new set of tasks that re-
quired field staff to learn and master different skills.
Feedback received from the interviewers immediately after
they completed training, from team calls throughout the
field period, and in debriefing sessions after the fieldwork
ended indicated that they enjoyed the project. Many of the
interviewers have requested that they would like to be
staffed on subsequent waves of the study.
Additional waves of the study (if funded) will be subject
to the same careful review and implementation of methods
developed for Wave I. For example, as the sample ages, the
researchers will consider the impact of attrition between
waves and options for supplementing the Wave I cohort with
new sample. Similarly, as advances in technology make the
collection of once complicated biomeasures suddenly fea-
sible for in-home collection, there will be a need to balance
comparability of measures and protocols across waves with
the implementation of newly available technology.
NSHAP data and documentation are available to regis-
tered users through the National Archive of Computerized
Data on Aging, within the Interuniversity Consortium for
Political and Social Research. More details on how to gain
access to the NSHAP data can be found at http://www.icpsr.
umich.edu/NACDA/news.html#nshap.
Funding
The NSHAP is supported by the National Institute on Aging, Office of
Women's Health Research, Office of AIDS Research, and the Office of
Behavioral and Social Science Research (5R01AG021487).
Correspondence
Address correspondence to Stephen Smith, M.A., NORC Health Care
Research Department, 55 East Monroe, Suite 3000, Chicago, IL 60603.
Email: smith-stephen@norc.org
References
American Association of Public Opinion Research. (2006). Standard defi-
nitions: Final dispositions of case codes and outcome rates for sur-
veys (4th ed.). Lenexa, KS: Author.
Jaszczak, A., Lundeen, L., & Smith, S. (2009). Using non-medically
trained interviewers to collect biomeasures in a national in-home
survey. Field Methods, 21, 26­48.
Laumann, E. O., Gagnon, J. H., Michael, R. T., & Michaels, S. (1994). The
social organization of sexuality. Sexual practices in the United States.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Laumann, E. O., & Michael, R. T. (2001). Sex, love, and health: Private
choices and public policies. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Laumann, E. O., Ellingson, S., Mahay, J., Paik, A., & Youm, Y. (2004). The
sexual organization of the city. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
National Bioethics Advisory Commission. (1999). Research involving hu-
man biological materials: Ethical issues and policy guidance (Vol. 1).
Rockville, MD: Author.
National Institutes of Health. (2003). Certificates of confidentiality:
Background Information. Bethesda, MD: Author. Retrieved March 20,
2009, from http://grants1.nih.gov/grants/policy/coc/background.htm.
Wargo, E., Jaszczak, A., Smith, S., & O'Muircheartaigh, C. (2007). A split
ballot experiment using increased incentives on NSHAP. Paper pre-
sented at the International Field Director's & Technology Confer-
ence, Santa Monica, CA.
Received July 22, 2008
Accepted October 6, 2008
Decision Editor: Robert B. Wallace, MD, MSc
