ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Population variability of phthalate metabolites and
bisphenol A concentrations in spot urine samples versus 24- or
48-h collections
Krista L. Yorita Christensen1, Matthew Lorber1, Holger M. Koch2, Marike Kolossa-Gehring3 and Marsha K. Morgan4
Human exposure to phthalates and bisphenol A (BPA) can be assessed through urinary biomonitoring, but methods to infer
daily intakes assume that spot sample concentrations are comparable to daily average concentrations. We evaluate this
assumption using human biomonitoring data from Germany and the United States (US). The German data comprised three
regional studies with spot samples and one with full-day samples analyzed for phthalate metabolites. The US data included: a
study on DEHP metabolites and BPA involving eight persons supplying all urine voids (from which 24-h samples were
constructed) for seven consecutive days; NHANES spot sample data on DEHP metabolites and BPA; and a regional study of
children with 48-h samples analyzed for BPA. In the German data, measures of central tendency differed, but spot and 24-h
samples showed generally comparable variance including 95th percentiles and maxima equidistant from central tendency
measures. In contrast, the US adult data from the eight-person study showed similar central tendencies for phthalate
metabolites and BPA, but generally greater variability for the spot samples, including higher 95th percentiles and maxima.
When comparing children's BPA concentrations in NHANES spot and 48-h samples, distributions showed similar central
tendency and variability. Overall, spot urinary concentrations of DEHP metabolites and BPA have variability roughly comparable
with corresponding 24-h average concentrations obtained from a comparable population, suggesting that spot samples can be
used to characterize population distributions of intakes. However, the analysis also suggests that caution should be exercised
when interpreting the high end of spot sample data sets.
Journal of Exposure Science and Environmental Epidemiology (2012) 22, 632--640; doi:10.1038/jes.2012.52; published online 6 June 2012
Keywords: phthalate; bisphenol A; metabolite; urine; variability
INTRODUCTION
The emergence of biomonitoring has ushered in a new era in the
characterization of human exposure to chemicals in the environ-
ment. Prior to the 1990s, the study of human exposure to chemicals
in the environment mainly focused on understanding intakes of
different chemicals through characterization of exposure media
concentrations and exposure contact rates.1 Regional and national
population surveys to determine the presence of chemicals in
the body gave exposure assessors another, arguably more
powerful, measure of exposure and internal dose. In these
general population surveys, chemicals measured in blood tend
to be those which are persistent in the environment and in the
body, and the measurements typically represent the accumula-
tion of the chemical over many years of exposure. Other
chemicals are measured in urine, and they represent a different
pattern both in persistence and exposure. These contaminants
tend not to persist in the body, with half-lives on the order of
days and hours, and are primarily excreted in urine. Exposure
might be associated with identifiable events, as might be the
case with the detection of pesticide metabolites in urine after
pesticide application, or exposure might be ubiquitous and less
understood. Such is the case with phthalates and bisphenol
A (BPA).
Although detection of phthalate metabolites and BPA in urine
prove that exposure occurs, the measurement of urinary
metabolites does not provide information on route of exposure,
or the rate of overall intake which resulted in the measured
concentrations. However, many studies have developed estimates
of daily intakes from the urinary concentrations of phthalate
metabolites and BPA in spot samples, mainly using what is termed
the ``creatinine-correction'' approach. This method takes advan-
tage of the common practice of measuring creatinine, along with
the target compounds, in a spot sample. Although measurement
of creatinine is primarily done to normalize concentrations across
individuals (i.e., to avoid issues which occur because urine
volumes are a function of hydration and can result in high or
low concentrations not reflective of chemical excretion), a
creatinine-adjusted concentration in urine (mass of chemical
divided by mass of creatinine) is also used to estimate daily intake.
This simple back-calculation method takes advantage of relation-
ships between a spot sample excretion of creatinine and total
daily creatinine excretions. Assuming consistent daily intakes of a
Received 16 November 2011; accepted 19 March 2012; published online 6 June 2012
1United States Environmental Protection Agency, National Center for Environmental Assessment, Office of Research and Development, Washington, District of Columbia, USA;
2Institute for Prevention and Occupational Medicine of the German Social Accident Insurance, Institute of the Ruhr-University Bochum (IPA), Bochum, Germany;
3Umweltbundesamt (Federal Environment Agency), Berlin, Germany; 4National Exposure Research Laboratory, Office of Research and Development, United States Environmental
Protection Agency, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, USA. 1. Correspondence to: Dr. Krista Yorita Christensen, United States Environmental Protection Agency, National
Center for Environmental Assessment, Office of Research and Development, Mailstop 8623P, 1200 Pennsylvania Ave NW, Washington, DC 20460, USA.
Tel.: þ 703 347 0185. Fax: þ 1 703 347 8692.
E-mail: Christensen.Krista@epa.gov
Journal of Exposure Science and Environmental Epidemiology (2012) 22, 632 -- 640
& 2012 Nature America, Inc. All rights reserved 1559-0631/12
www.nature.com/jes
contaminant, a urine sample excretion can be related to a daily
excretion of that contaminant based on the fraction of total daily
creatinine excretion in that urine sample. A critical assumption in
this approach is that the creatinine-adjusted concentration of a
contaminant in a spot urine sample is equal to the contaminant
daily average concentration in urine. However, given their
first-order kinetics with half-lives in the order of hours (B5 h to
12 h2--4), peak concentrations of DEHP metabolites and BPA occur
in urine shortly after exposure, with decreasing concentrations
several hours after exposure.2,5,6 These peak concentrations could
be mistaken to imply high daily exposures when using the
creatinine-correction approach, and conversely, the lower con-
centrations could be mistaken for low daily exposures. Ideally, one
would like full day (24 h) average concentrations to use in a
creatinine-correction model, but such data are rarely available for
large population surveys.
For compounds with short half-lives (on the order of hours), the
variability in concentrations seen in a population of 24-h samples
from a specific group of individuals will inevitably be less than the
variability seen in a population comprised of all the individual urine
samples from that same population. However, most surveys only
take a single sample during a day, and consequently may miss
some of the high concentrations that would be seen in their
sample population if they sampled all urine events over the course
of a day (or longer) from those individuals. The purpose of this
study is to evaluate the comparability of spot urinary concentra-
tions of phthalate metabolites and/or BPA obtained from a specific
population, with the 24-h average urinary concentrations of these
compounds obtained from a comparable population. If the two
distributions are reasonably comparable, then one can use the
creatinine approach for studying the distribution of intakes within
a population with an acceptable degree of certainty, at least with
regard to the urine-concentration term. Spot and long-term (24-h
and 48-h) sample sets analyzed for phthalate metabolites and BPA
were retrieved for this examination. Measures of central tendency
and spread were examined within these populations. Additionally,
statistical tests were applied to paired spot and long-term data sets
to determine whether the two data sets could have come from the
same distribution.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study Descriptions
Characteristics of the data sets used in this study are summarized in
Table 1, with further details provided in the Supplementary Material. Three
German data sets using spot urine samples included surveys of 45 adults in
2007 in Bochum,7 85 adults in 2002 in Erlangen,8,9 and 102 adults in 2005
in Bavaria (the latter data have not been published, but a description of the
larger study of measurements from 1005 individuals from which a subset
of 102 were analyzed for phthalate metabolites can be found in Kutting
et al.)10 To compare with these data sets was a set of 712 students, aged
20--29, who provided 24-h urine samples between 1988 and 2003 to the
Environmental Specimen Bank of the Federal Environmental Agency of
Germany. A description of this database and a summary of partial results
can be found in Wittassek et al.11 and the website for the Environmental
Specimen Bank: http://www.umweltprobenbank.de/en/documents. All
urine samples from these German data sets were analyzed for di-2-
ethylhexyl phthalate (DEHP) metabolites: mono-(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate
(MEHP), mono-(2-ethyl-5-hydroxyhexyl) phthalate (MEHHP), and mono-
(2-ethyl-5-oxohexyl) phthalate (MEOHP); for the mono-ester metabolite
of di-n-butyl phthalate (DnBP), mono-n-butyl phthalate (MnBP); for the
mono-ester metabolite of di-isobutyl phthalate (DiBP), mono-isobutyl
phthalate (MiBP); and for the mono-ester metabolite of butylbenzyl
phthalate (BBzP), mono-benzyl phthalate (MBzP). In the spot sample data
sets from Bochum and Erlangen, values below the limit of detection
(LOD) were substituted with zero. In the spot sample data set from
Bavaria and the 24-h urine data set from the Environmental Specimen
Bank, values below the limit of quantification (LOQ) were substituted
with LOQ/O2.
A data set from Atlanta, Georgia in the United States included eight
adults, four women, and four men aged 25--59 years of age, who provided
a complete set of urine spot samples (n ¼ 427) over a consecutive 7-day
period in 2005.12 Each sample was analyzed for the DEHP metabolites,
MEHP and MEHHP as well as for BPA, and 24-h concentrations were
constructed from the spot sample concentrations. First morning voids,
defined as the first urination event after 0500 hours, were culled from the
full set of spot samples. To compare with the urinary concentrations of all
spot samples, first morning void spot samples, and 24-h samples from the
Atlanta data set, we used the 2005--2006 National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey (NHANES) data on these metabolites for adults
(418 years). This cycle (2005--2006) was chosen for comparability to the
timing of the Atlanta study. NHANES participants provided urine samples
throughout the day (rather than first morning voids), and phthalate
metabolite concentrations are available for a random 1/3 sample of
participants. In both the Atlanta data set and the NHANES, values below
the LOD were substituted with LOD/O2.
BPA urinary concentrations in 48-h samples were determined as part of
the Children's Total (Aggregate) Exposure to Persistent Pesticides and
Other Persistent Organic Pollutants (CTEPP) study.13 For the present study,
we used a subset of CTEPP 48-h urine samples collected during a 2-day
period in 2000--2001 from 110 children, ages 23 to 64 months, including 81
children from Ohio and 29 from North Carolina. The 48-h samples (one per
child), constructed by pooling six spot samples (3 each day, from the
morning, afternoon, and evening), were analyzed for total (free plus
conjugated) BPA. To compare with this BPA data set, we retrieved the
2003--2004 NHANES BPA results for children, aged 6--11 years. This cycle
and age range were chosen for comparability to the CTEPP study, given
that 2003--2004 was the first cycle in which BPA was measured, and that
measurements are only available for participants aged Z6 years. Values
below the LOD were substituted with LOD/O2.
All studies contained concentrations reported either on a volume basis
(ng/ml) or a creatinine-adjusted basis (ng contaminant/mg creatinine). We
conducted all of our analyses on volume-based concentrations. Although
hydration certainly affects dilution and volume-based concentrations, and
creatinine-based concentrations are thought to address issues with
hydration, creatinine-based concentrations themselves may not account
for differences in race and nationality. The Supplementary Material
contains an exercise showing that the variability in volume-based
concentrations is similar to that of creatinine-based concentrations, using
the DEHP-metabolite data from the Atlanta and NHANES data sets.
Protocols for these studies were reviewed for human subject
considerations within the institutions, which conducted the studies, and
all raw data used in this study were deidentified.
Statistical Methods
All statistical analyses were performed using SAS/STAT software, Version
9.2. The distributions of all of these population data sets were characterized
by calculating measures of central tendency (geometric mean (GM),
median) as well as spread (geometric standard deviation (GSD), inter-
quartile range) and extreme values (95th percentile, maximum). For
NHANES only, weighted statistics were derived using weights supplied by
the National Center for Health Statistics. For the CTEPP data, there was one
outlier, a child with a BPA-urine concentration 4200ng/ml. Because this
value was many times greater than the next highest value (39ng/ml), we
treated this result as an outlier and did not use it in the statistical analyses.
Further statistical tests were used to evaluate the comparability
between concentrations derived from a population of spot samples and
concentrations derived from a comparable population of 24-h samples (i.e.,
those that might be obtained from the same population). It should be
noted that such testing is most appropriate for the Atlanta data set,
because the spot samples and the 24-h samples came from the same
participants, over the same time period. In contrast, it is less meaningful to
compare any of the concentrations derived from the German spot sample
data sets with the concentrations derived from the German 24-h samples,
Variability of phthalate, BPA concentrations
Christensen et al
633
Journal of Exposure Science and Environmental Epidemiology (2012), 632 -- 640
& 2012 Nature America, Inc.
because they represent different people: the general adult population
versus 20- to 29-year-old students, from different parts of Germany,
different collection years, different time of day for sampling, and most
importantly, different exposure patterns. Despite these limitations, these
tests give additional insight as to whether the distributions are similarly
shaped, so we compared the results using German 24-h samples with each
of the German spot samples, the Atlanta 24-h samples with the Atlanta
spot samples, and the CTEPP BPA 48-h data set with NHANES data on BPA.
Urine concentrations for each metabolite were log base 10 transformed
before performing these tests, in order to more closely approximate
normality; we also include results from these tests with no transformation
applied, in the Supplementary Material. As the distributions of phthalate
metabolite concentrations in urine may not meet normality assumptions
(especially given limited sample sizes) even after appropriate transforma-
tion, we compared distributions using non-parametric methods. The
equality of the distributions was compared using the Cramer-von Mises
criterion, and the variances of the distributions were compared using
Levene's test. The Cramer-von Mises criterion compares two empirical
distributions by ranking the values in the two distributions separately, then
in combination, and comparing the resulting rank orders --- subsequently,
values closer to zero indicate less difference (more similarly shaped
distributions). It is considered more robust than other methods (such as
the Kolmogorov--Smirnov test), when differences in location are expected.
Levene's test assesses equality of variance between two sample sets, using
the squared deviation of values from the group means. As Levene's test
gives information about the equality of the spread of the distribution
without assuming similar central tendencies, it is likely the most
informative and appropriate test for use in comparing the German 24-h
samples with the German spot samples and the BPA data sets. As noted
above, the differences in the populations and exposure patterns in the
German data may lead to differences in measures of central tendency, but
it is possible to assess whether the distributions from each population have
a similar degree of variability.
For the Atlanta data set, we also created a series of bootstrap data sets
from the Atlanta spot sample data. This was done by randomly selecting
one spot sample per person per day, for a total of 56 values; this process
was repeated 1000 times to generate 1000 data sets, each with one spot
sample per person per day (i.e. 56 samples in each). To characterize the
overall results from this bootstrap sample, the median values of the
statistical measures calculated for each of the 1000 data sets were
calculated and presented. The purpose of constructing the bootstrapped
data sets is primarily to assess the right tail (high-end) of a distribution of
spot samples when one obtains only one sample per person per day. If one
samples all daily urine events for a given population, such as the 427 spot
samples of the Atlanta data set, one sees the full extent of the right tail. On
the other hand, if each individual provided one sample per day at random
times, the shape of the distribution and in particular, the characterization
of the right tail is unknown, but likely would be different than the right tail
of the full sample set of 427 spot samples. The bootstrap attempts to
characterize this difference between all samples versus one sample taken
at random times during a day. However, given the limited sample size and
skewed nature of the data, the estimation of upper percentiles (such as the
95th) is challenging.14 In looking at urinary metabolite concentrations in
the general population, there is generally a long right tail --- that is, most of
the data are clustered in the lower range and there are a few persons with
much larger values --- which may lead to bias in bootstrap estimation of
the upper percentiles. To address this issue, we estimate the 95th
percentile in the bootstrapped samples using both the empirical
distribution function with averaging (the most widely used method, and
the default option in SAS) and the weighted average (i.e. linear
interpolation between ranked values).15 This weighted average approach
should provide a more robust estimate for comparison.
Table 1. Summary of studies used for analysis.
Study name Country/year Metabolites Number of subjects Sample type Collection method
Bochum Germany/2007 DEHP metabolites
MEHP, MEHHP, and
MEOHP; MnBP; MiBP;
MBzP
45 Adults Spot First morning voids
Erlangen Germany/2002 DEHP metabolites
MEHP, MEHHP, and
MEOHP; MnBP; MBzP
85 Adults Spot First morning voids
Bavaria Germany/2003 DEHP metabolites
MEHP, MEHHP, and
MEOHP; MnBP; MiBP;
MBzP
102 Children and adults Spot Spot sample taken at
varying points in the day
German
Environmental
Specimen
Bank
Germany/1988--
2003
DEHP metabolites
MEHP, MEHHP, and
MEOHP; MnBP; MiBP;
MBzP
712 Young adults 24-h 24-h collection
Atlanta USA/2005 DEHP metabolites
MEHP and MEHHP,
and BPA
8 Adults 24-h; spot;
bootstrap spot
data set created
All spot samples fully
collected over 7-day
period; 24-h samples
constructed from spot
samples
NHANES USA/2005--2006 DEHP metabolites
MEHP and MEHHP
(Weighted) 212,597,057
(SD ¼ 14,598,953) adults
Spot Spot samples taken at
varying points in the day
CTEPP USA/2000--2001 BPA 110 Children 48-hr Composite of six samples
(morning, afternoon,
and evening samples
over 48-h)
NHANES USA/2003--2004 BPA (Weighted) 24,091,436
(SD ¼ 2,158,589) children
Spot Spot samples taken at
varying points in the day
Abbreviations: BPA, bisphenol A; CTEPP, Children's Total (Aggregate) Exposure to Persistent Pesticides and Other Persistent Organic Pollutants;
DEHP, di-2-ethylhexyl phthalate; MBzP, monobenzyl phthalate; MEHHP, mono-(2-ethyl-5-hydroxyhexyl) phthalate; MEHP, mono-(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate;
MEOHP, mono-(2-ethyl-5-oxohexyl) phthalate; MiBP, mono-isobutyl phthalate; MnBP, mono-n-butyl phthalate; NHANES, National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey.
Variability of phthalate, BPA concentrations
Christensen et al
634
Journal of Exposure Science and Environmental Epidemiology (2012), 632 -- 640 & 2012 Nature America, Inc.
RESULTS
The results are described in four sections: the German data on
phthalate metabolites, the US data on phthalate metabolites, the
US data on BPA -- Adults, and the US data on BPA - Children.
Figures 1--5 are box and whisker plots showing the median, the
interquartile range, and the 95th percentile, of a given distribu-
tion. The results of the statistical tests comparing pairs of studies
are displayed in Table 2. Additional results are included in tables in
the Supplementary Materials.
German Data on Phthalate Metabolites
Figures 1 and 2 depict the distribution of the measured phthalate
metabolite concentrations for the four German populations (three
spot sample and one 24-h data set). Adults from the Bochum
study showed the lowest concentrations and those from Erlangen,
the highest. The difference in central tendency measurements of
the six phthalate metabolites between these two populations
ranged from a factor of about 5 to almost 20. However, although
the results show different central tendencies, and correspondingly
higher 95th percentile and maximum values, the GSDs for all
populations and metabolites seem to vary narrowly from less than
the GM to well within a factor of 2 above the GM. The 25th
percentile of all four data sets was about half the median and the
75th percentile was about twice the median. The 95th percentile
was B3 to 6 times the median. The 24-h concentration data for the
DEHP metabolites had spread comparable to the spot samples, but
the 24-h concentration data had the most spread for MnBP, MiBP,
and MBzP, including the highest maxima. For example, the
maximum 24-h measurement of MnBP (2090 ng/ml) was about
twice as high as the highest maximum value found in the spot
samples: 1256 ng/ml from the Erlangen samples. We believe it's
possible that a contributing factor to 24-h samples showing equal
and maybe higher spread than the spot samples is the much larger
sample size (n ¼ 712) of the 24-h data set compared with the spot
sample data sets (all n o100). Another contributing factor would
be the longer time frame for the 24-h samples (1988 to 2003) when
phthalate use would change and contribute to their variable
exposure patterns. The spot samples, in contrast, all took place in a
narrower time frame of 2002 to 2006.
Table 2 shows the statistical measures comparing the distribu-
tion of concentrations from 24-h samples to the distribution of
concentrations from the three sets of spot samples. In nearly all
cases, the Cramer-von Mises criterion was quite close to zero
(ranging from 0.0003 to 0.016), indicating a similar overall shape of
the distributions. When comparing variance, there were a few
groups for which Levene's test indicated significantly different
variance: between the 24-h samples and the Bavaria spot samples
(all but MBzP) and between the 24-h samples and the Erlangen
spot samples for two DEHP metabolites (MEOHP, MEHHP). These
patterns are reflected in the descriptive statistics --- for example,
the maximum concentrations for MEOHP and MEHHP were much
higher in the Erlangen data compared with the 24-h data.
US Data on DEHP Metabolites
Figure 3 depicts the distribution of the two measured DEHP-
metabolite concentrations for the NHANES and four permutations
of the Atlanta data set. The central tendency measures of median
and GM for these data sets were very similar, unlike the German
data. Four of the data sets are permutations from the same study,
and thus it is expected that their measures of central tendency
would be similar, but the similarity with the national NHANES data
does suggest that this focused data set characterized exposures
that, at least for their central tendency, were similar to national
tendencies. However, unlike the German data, there was generally
a greater amount of variability when comparing the concentra-
tions from all spot samples, to the 24-h averages.
The rank order from most to least variable is as follows: NHANES
4all spot samples 4bootstrap spot samples 4first morning voids
424-h samples. NHANES had the highest maximum, about 4 to 10
times higher than the maximum from the Atlanta spot samples.
At least one reason for this disparity between NHANES and the
Atlanta data sets is sample size: over 1600 adults each supplying a
Figure 1. Box plots of DEHP metabolites from four German surveys (median and 95th percentiles displayed on graphs).
Variability of phthalate, BPA concentrations
Christensen et al
635
Journal of Exposure Science and Environmental Epidemiology (2012), 632 -- 640
& 2012 Nature America, Inc.
spot sample for NHANES, compared with only eight individuals in
the Atlanta data. Although these eight individuals supplied 427
spot samples, they still represent lifestyles and exposure patterns
of only eight individuals, all living in one city.
Within the four groupings of the Atlanta data set, the variability
in concentrations from the 24-h samples and the first morning
void spot samples were comparable, and both lower than the
variability in the other two groupings (all spot samples and
bootstrap spot samples). The maximum for the 24-h and first
morning voids were 2 to 4 times lower than the maxima for the
other two permutations.
It is interesting that although the 95th percentile values for the
24-h and NHANES data sets were virtually identical, the maximum
for NHANES was over an order of magnitude higher than the
maximum of the 24-h samples. Again, this is likely owing to the
much larger sample size of NHANES, as well as different
distribution of sampling times (and fasting protocols) in the
NHANES. But it does highlight an intuitive expectation: a 24-h
sample will dampen the high as well as low concentrations that
arise from spot samples from phthalates and related contaminants
for which exposure is frequent and almost a daily event, and
elimination of metabolites in urine is in the order of hours. The
highest concentrations are near the time of exposure and low
concentrations are found many hours after exposure. But when
assessors have a large database such as NHANES, with which to
study exposures, the important question remains: do adults at the
high end of the concentration distribution in NHANES experience
a much higher daily exposure than might be implied had all of
them supplied 24-h instead of spot samples?
Possibly the best comparison we can make to answer this
question is the comparison between bootstrapped spot samples
and 24-h samples from the Atlanta cohort. Here the comparison is
between a 24-h sample and a random sample taken from the
same person on same day. Proportionately, the ratio of the GSD
to the GM is about twice as high for the bootstrapped as
compared with the 24-h samples. The 95th percentile for the
bootstrapped sample metabolite concentrations is about 15--20%
higher than the 95th percentile for the 24-h samples (using a
weighted average to estimate the 95th percentile in the
bootstrapped samples), and the maxima are about twice as high
for the bootstraps as compared with the 24-h samples. All of these
measures suggest that the high-end of a population of spot
samples tends to be higher than that of a population of 24-h
samples.
Figure 2. Box plots of MBzP, MnBP, and MiBP from four German surveys (median and 95th percentiles displayed on graphs).
Figure 3. Box plots of DEHP-metabolites, MEHP and MEHHP, from US surveys including four from the Atlanta survey (all spot, bootstrapped
spot, first morning void, and constructed 24 h) and NHANES (median and 95th percentiles displayed on graphs).
Variability of phthalate, BPA concentrations
Christensen et al
636
Journal of Exposure Science and Environmental Epidemiology (2012), 632 -- 640 & 2012 Nature America, Inc.
A comparison between the bootstrapped data and all 427 spot
samples from Atlanta also show trends of note. In general, the
measures of central tendency (GM, median) and spread (GSD,
interquartile range) of the bootstrapped samples were similar to
the full set of 427, from which the bootstrap was derived, but the
maximum was much lower. This finding is logical --- when
randomly selecting from each day, invariably all of the 1000
bootstrap data sets of 56 daily spot samples will miss several of
the high concentrations that are incorporated into the analysis of
all 427 samples.
For the statistical tests of distribution comparability, similar
results to the comparison of German 24-h and spot samples were
found for the Atlanta data (Table 2). Of all the data sets used, the
Atlanta data set is the only one with 24-h and spot samples from
the same individuals; thus, it is more appropriate to test whether
the spot samples are from the same distribution as the 24-h
values. The Cramer-von Mises criterion was close to zero for all
comparisons (ranging from 0.002 to 0.005), indicating similar
overall shape of the distributions. Levene's test indicated different
variance for MEHHP 24-h and spot samples (P-value ¼ 0.008), but
borderline similarity in variance for MEHP (P-value ¼ 0.06).
We also evaluated the distribution of MEHHP and MEHP urinary
concentrations on a creatinine-corrected basis (results in Supple-
mentary Material). The results were quite similar to those found
using a volume basis in magnitude and variability, so that the
overall patterns were preserved when comparing across data sets.
For example, the GM for MEHP ranged from 2.96 (NHANES) to 6.44
(Atlanta 24-h) mg/g creatinine; the GM for the spot and boot-
strapped spot samples was intermediate (4.73 and 4.39 mg/g
creatinine, respectively) and for each data set the GSD was
similar in magnitude to the GM. Also, similar to results using a
Figure 4. Box plots of BPA from US surveys including four from the
Atlanta survey (all spot, bootstrapped spot, first morning void, and
constructed 24 h) and NHANES (median and 95th percentiles dis-
played on graphs).
Table 2. Statistical comparisonsa for estimated log10
-urinary
concentration (ng/ml) of phthalate metabolites and BPA.
Metabolite Comparison groups Cramer-von Mises
criterion
Levene's test
P-value
Germany
MEOHP 24-h versus Bavaria 0.0019 o0.0001
24-h versus Bochum 0.0060 0.9120
24-h versus Erlangen 0.0073 0.0006
MEHHP 24-h versus Bavaria 0.0024 o0.0001
24-h versus Bochum 0.0020 0.6423
24-h versus Erlangen 0.0073 o0.0001
MEHP 24-h versus Bavaria 0.0032 0.0021
24-h versus Bochum 0.0072 0.6964
24-h versus Erlangen 0.0019 0.1096
MnBP 24-h versus Bavaria 0.0056 0.0420
24-h versus Bochum 0.0155 0.9914
24-h versus Erlangen 0.0039 0.4012
MiBP 24-h versus Bavaria 0.0003 0.0019
24-h versus Bochum 0.0015 0.8939
24-h versus Erlangen --- ---
MBzP 24-h versus Bavaria 0.0008 0.3942
24-h versus Bochum 0.0006 0.8841
24-h versus Erlangen 0.0101 0.9919
Atlanta
MEHHP 24-h versus spots 0.0016 0.0075
24-h versus first
morning void
0.0021 0.0506
MEHP 24-h versus spots 0.0050 0.0629
24-h versus first
morning void
0.0043 0.7376
BPA 24-h versus spots 0.0020 0.0028
24-h versus first
morning void
0.0002 0.0207
North Carolina and Ohio, NHANES
BPA 48-h (NC) versus
spots
0 0.5029
48-h (OH) versus
spots
0 0.0971
Abbreviations: BPA, bisphenol A; MBzP, monobenzyl phthalate; MEHHP,
mono-(2-ethyl-5-hydroxyhexyl) phthalate; MEHP, mono-(2-ethylhexyl)
phthalate; MEOHP, mono-(2-ethyl-5-oxohexyl) phthalate; MiBP, mono-
isobutyl phthalate; MnBP, mono-n-butyl phthalate; NHANES, National
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey.
aGermany -- comparisons are between 24-h data from 1988--2003, and
three studies relying on spot samples collected from Bavaria (2003),
Bochum (2007), and Erlangen (2002). Atlanta -- comparisons are between
24-h and spot sample data from eight individuals collecting all urine for
seven consecutive days (2005). North Carolina and Ohio -- comparisons are
between each state's 48-h data (CTEPP Study) and NHANES spot urine data
from 2003--2004. For the Cramer-von Mises criterion, values close to zero
indicate more similarity between groups. For Levene's test, P-values
represent a test for difference; that is, a smaller P-value is evidence of
greater difference between the two data samples.
Figure 5. Box plots of BPA from the CTEPP study (48-h samples from
NC and OH) and NHANES (medians and 95th percentiles displayed
on graphs).
Variability of phthalate, BPA concentrations
Christensen et al
637
Journal of Exposure Science and Environmental Epidemiology (2012), 632 -- 640
& 2012 Nature America, Inc.
volume basis, the maximum values were lowest in the Atlanta
24-h samples (76.6 mg/g creatinine) and highest in the NHANES
data set (707.23 mg/g creatinine).
US Data on BPA -- Adults
Figure 4 depicts the distribution of BPA concentrations for the
NHANES and four permutations of the Atlanta data set. Many of
the trends noted above for the US data on DEHP metabolites are
seen here as well. The central tendency measures of median and GM
for these data sets were very similar, rounding off to 2 or 3ng/ml.
NHANES data showed the most spread in concentrations, but this
spread showed up mostly above the 95th percentile. For NHANES,
the 95th percentile was about 11 ng/ml compared with the range
from 7 to 10 ng/ml for the four groupings of the Atlanta data set.
However, the maximum was 383ng/ml compared with the
maximums between 12 and 50 ng/ml for the four groupings of
the Atlanta data set. Unlike the DEHP-metabolite data discussed
above, the first morning void concentrations of BPA showed a
variability that better matched other spot sample groupings than the
24-h samples. The interquartile range of the 24-h samples was the
narrowest at 1.5--3.2ng/ml, whereas it was wider for first morning
voids at 1.3--5.0ng/ml. The 95th percentile for the 24-h samples was
7.0 ng/ml, whereas it was 9.1 ng/ml for the first morning voids,
similar to the other spot-sample groups, 8.6ng/ml for all spot
samples and 9.9ng/ml for the bootstrap samples.
When using statistical tests to evaluate the comparability of
24-h and spot samples in the Atlanta BPA data, the pattern of
results was similar to those found for the phthalate metabolites in
this data set (Table 2). The first morning void spot samples were
more similar to the 24-h samples than were the group of all spot
samples in terms of shape (Cramer-von Mises criterion values of
0.0002 and 0.002, respectively). The variability was also more
similar between the first morning void and 24-h samples (Levene's
P-values of 0.02 and 0.003, respectively).
US Data on BPA -- Children
Figure 5 depicts the distribution of BPA concentrations for the
NHANES and the CTEPP 48-h data sets from NC and OH. The
CTEPP data showed very similar distributions between urine
samples collected from children in NC and OH. When comparing
the urinary BPA concentrations in the NHANES data with those
from the CTEPP data, the measures of central tendency were quite
similar, although the GMs and medians were slightly higher
among CTEPP children compared with the NHANES data (children
aged 6--11 years). The interquartile range and 95th percentile
values were also similar among the three groups. The CTEPP data
show a shift to the right compared with NHANES: all of these
measures are about 1--2 ng/ml higher than their NHANES
counterparts. This could be the result of the demographic
differences in the two data sets -- the NHANES captured a
national sample of 6--11 year olds whereas the CTEPP study
targeted a non-random selection of 2--5 year-olds in NC and OH.
The 48-h samples had a very similar GSD compared with the
NHANES data, with values ranging from 2.40 to 2.68 ng/ml.
The NHANES data had a somewhat higher maximum value
(46.1 ng/ml) compared with the 48-h data (maxima of 37.4 and
38.6 ng/ml for NC and OH, respectively).
Summary
Some dissimilar trends emerged from the US and German data
sets and their long-term and spot samples. The 24-h DEHP data
from the Atlanta data set show a narrower spread than the
corresponding spot samples. There, the spot samples showed
variability that was dampened when averaging over 24-h periods.
In contrast, the German 24-h phthalate metabolite concentrations
showed a much wider range and variability as compared with the
German spot samples from different individuals and locations. The
US BPA data are more similar to the German data, in that they
show a spread and variability that appears quite comparable with
the spot samples. Reflecting the similarity in the amount of spread
and measures of central tendency for these BPA data sets,
statistical tests indicated no significant differences between the
CTEPP data and the NHANES data when comparing distributions
in terms of overall shape, or variance (Table 2).
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
Researchers have used spot sample surveys to infer daily intakes
of key contaminants. As discussed earlier, simple methods to
backcalculate daily intakes from spot samples rely on the
assumption that the spot sample concentration is a good
surrogate for the 24-h average concentration. The ideal data set
to examine this question would be one which includes a large
number of individuals who provided a 24-h sample as well as a
spot sample randomly taken on the day of the 24-h sample. We
found one data set that had this feature, but it included only eight
individuals, so any generalizations or conclusions from these data
must be made cautiously. We believe a sample size much larger
than eight would be necessary to capture different patterns of
exposure. How ``large'' such a sample size is obviously an issue of
debate; 100 individuals would be better than eight, but 1000
would be even better. If each of the 712 individuals in the German
data set provided a spot sample during the day in which the 24-h
sample was provided, then a fairly rigorous analysis could be
done. Without this luxury, we sought several diverse individual
data sets including spot samples and 24- or 48-h samples
including different contaminants (phthalates and BPA) and
different age groups (children to adults).
Besides our analysis, there are three published studies that
looked at the differences between urinary concentrations of
phthalates and other non-persistent contaminants in spot and
24-h samples. Frederiksen et al.16 examined the volume-based
(not creatinine-based) concentrations of phthalate metabolites in
1st and 2nd morning samples as well as 24-h samples from 129
healthy Danish children (n ¼ 103, 6--16 years of age) and young
adults (n ¼ 26, 17--21 years of age). They measured metabolites of
DEP, DBP, BBzP, DEHP, and DiNP. The highest concentrations of all
phthalate metabolites were in the 1st morning urine sample, and
on a mass basis, between 40% and 48% of daily excretions were
found in this first morning sample. The 2nd morning voids were
also higher than the 24-h averages, but by a lesser amount than
the 1st morning voids. Although not obtaining other spot sample
data, it can be surmised that, for this population, the morning
samples captured the daily high concentrations for phthalates.
Li et al.17 evaluated the variability in urinary concentrations of
mono-hydroxy polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (OH-PAHs) on
the same group of eight persons and 427 samples from the
Atlanta data set studied here for BPA and DEHP metabolites.
Among the 427 samples, they looked at the concentration of OH-
PAHs in the population of first morning voids (n ¼ 56), constructed
24-h voids (n ¼ 56) and over all samples (n ¼ 427). They found that
the first morning voids had the highest concentrations, with GMs
and medians roughly 1.2 and 1.5 times higher than analogous
metrics for constructed 24-h samples. Interestingly, however, the
GMs and medians were similar or slightly lower over the
population of 427 samples as compared with the constructed
24-h samples for the different OH-PAHs. This might suggest that
for OH-PAHs, spot sample concentrations taken at random times
of the day would yield information on the central tendencies that
is comparable with the central tendencies derived from a
distribution of 24-h samples.
In the third study, Scher et al.18 collected first morning voids and
24-h samples from farmers and their children potentially exposed
to chlorpyrifos. They measured 3,5,6-trichloro-2-pyridinol (TCP),
Variability of phthalate, BPA concentrations
Christensen et al
638
Journal of Exposure Science and Environmental Epidemiology (2012), 632 -- 640 & 2012 Nature America, Inc.
a chlorpyrifos metabolite, in the first morning void the day
following application of chlorpyrifos to a nearby agricultural field,
and in the corresponding 24-h void for the day following
application. This strategy was employed because toxicokinetics
suggested that a peak concentration in urine would appear
roughly 24 h following an exposure. As expected, the first morning
void concentrations of TCP were higher than those estimated from
the 24-h samples.
All of these studies showed evidence that the first morning void
might be higher than a 24-h average, whereas the study on PAH
metabolites additionally showed that random samples taken
throughout the day might show similar central tendencies as
compared with 24-h samples. The study on chlorpyrifos was
targeted based on a likelihood of recent exposure, and an
expectation that the peak concentration in urine might occur 24 h
after this exposure, about the time of the first morning void. For
this reason, it is not unexpected that the first morning void had
higher concentrations than the 24-h samples. For the study on
phthalates and children/young adults, one consideration perhaps
is that these younger individuals do not wake up and urinate at
night as frequently as older adults and often not at all, such that
the first morning voids include all phthalate metabolites that
would have migrated to the bladder overnight, and as a result,
their first morning void might well have higher concentrations as
compared with the first morning voids of adults.
Two other studies have also looked at the relationship between
urinary concentrations of BPA and phthalates over time, although in
a somewhat different way. Mahalingaiah et al.19 examined the
urinary concentration of BPA in spot samples taken from 82 subjects
seeking infertility evaluation and treatment, and had multiple spot
samples from a subset of individuals. Although the authors did not
examine correlation of BPA concentrations in spot samples taken
during the same day, they did look at how well a single spot sample
characterized long-term trends in the full set of spot samples. They
concluded that a single spot sample had good ability to identify
individuals in the highest tertile of exposure, and that predictive
power improved when two samples from the same day were used.
Similarly, Teitelbaum et al.20 evaluated urinary concentrations of
phthalate metabolites, phytoestrogens and phenols among 35min-
ority children over a 6-month period, to determine how well a single
spot sample characterized long-term trends. They also concluded
that a single spot sample was reliable in ranking subjects according
to tertile of all the analytes studied. These studies addressing a
different aspect of the question, on the variability in spot versus
long-term sampling, also provide confidence that a single spot
sample may recapitulate trends in exposure.
In our study, we found that first morning voids of the two DEHP
metabolites and BPA in the Atlanta cohort of adults showed a
narrow range of variability, comparable with the 24-h samples,
and lower than the variability of all spot samples. The central
tendencies of the first morning voids were comparable with 24-h
and other spot samples, including NHANES samples, although the
first morning void of MEHHP was a bit higher. This is also what
Preau et al.12 found for MEHHP in the same data set.
Aylward et al.21 studied the issue of extrapolating spot versus
24-h concentrations of DEHP to daily intakes directly using the Atlanta
cohort. They determined daily intakes in two ways: from concen-
trations in spot samples using a creatinine-correction approach
and from concentrations in 24-h constructed averages on a
volume-basis approach. They found that intakes determined from
concentrations in spot samples ranged from 20--300% of intakes
determined from 24-h average concentrations. From their analysis,
it is clear that application of the creatinine-correction approach
can underestimate as well as overestimate daily intakes for a given
individual. But what is the expectation of over or under estimation
over a full population? As mentioned often, this Atlanta cohort
contains only eight adults in one city, so one must be cautious
about drawing any conclusions from an analysis of their data.
This issue is not only a matter of general interest, but it takes on
additional importance when the extrapolation is used to comment
on population health risk. Health and/or regulatory benchmarks
for phthalates and BPA are expressed on an intake basis. Intakes
have been derived from concentrations in spot samples using the
creatinine-correction approach, and the upper ends of the
population distributions have been examined for their relationship
to these intake-based benchmarks. Koch et al.,22 for example,
measured spot urine concentrations of metabolites of six
phthalates in 111 German children aged 5--6 years during a
mandatory health examination for entrance into the education
system, and determined each child's intake of each phthalate
using the creatinine-correction approach. They compared the
intakes of each phthalate with the Tolerable Daily Intake (TDI) for
that phthalate, and also developed a cumulative TDI (TDICUM
), by
adding the ratio of the individual child's intake divided by the TDI
for each phthalate, that is, the sum of (intakePH
/TDIPH
) over the six
phthalates. They found that about 2% of the children (2 of 111)
exceeded the TDI for DnBP, 1% approached the TDI for DEHP, and
24% exceeded the TDICUM
for the sum of DEHP, DnBP, and DiBP. In
a general population study entailing 85 German individuals, Koch
et al.8 measured four metabolites of DEHP and, from these,
determined daily intakes using the creatinine approach. They
found that 10 of 85 individuals had intakes that exceeded the
European Union TDI value (at the time of publication in 2003) of
37 mg/kg per day, and that 26 of 85 individuals had intakes higher
than the US Reference Dose (RfD) of 20 mg/kg per day. One can
question whether the individuals identified in these studies
actually had an intake on the day of sampling that exceeded
the TDI or RfD for the given phthalate. However, if the
distributions of spot and full-day urinary concentrations are
similar, one may infer that B2% of children in the region of
Germany studied, would experience an exposure to DnBP greater
than the TDI on any given day.
It should be noted that health benchmarks including the RfD
and the TDI are often developed assuming a long-term, and not a
single day, of exposure. The studies summarized above made
observations based on a surveys of single-day samples. As well,
the analysis in this paper looked only at inferences made from
single spot samples taken during one day. As noted earlier, there
has been some work on longitudinal variability --- whether a
high concentration on a single day from an individual suggests
ongoing elevations for that individual, a rare occasion, or
something in between.19,20 Preau et al.,12 for example, did examine
day-to-day variability in DEHP metabolites from the Atlanta cohort
and found substantial variability from this perspective.
For short-lived compounds such as phthalates and BPA, it is
expected that the variability in concentrations seen in a population
of 24-h samples from a specific group of individuals will, by
definition, be less than the variability seen in a population
comprised of all the individual urine samples from that same
population. We saw this when we were comparing the 427
samples in the Atlanta cohort with their 24-h samples. However,
one does not take all the urine samples in exposure surveys such
as the NHANES; one takes only a single sample during a day. Given
this fact, it is easy to envision that a spot sample survey will miss
some of the high concentrations that would be seen in their
sample population, if they sampled all urine events over the course
of a day (or from several days), from those individuals rather than
just one sample. In the same way, a population of 24-h samples
might very well characterize some of the days with high exposures
that are not captured in spot samples (e.g., if the individual who
had high exposure had given a spot sample before the exposure
occurred). These are the issues we attempted to investigate.
We recognize that an optimal data set is simply unavailable to
address this question fully. The Atlanta data set best meets the
criteria, and perhaps the most direct analysis is that comparing the
56 person-days of 24-h samples to the bootstrapped data sets of
Variability of phthalate, BPA concentrations
Christensen et al
639
Journal of Exposure Science and Environmental Epidemiology (2012), 632 -- 640
& 2012 Nature America, Inc.
56 person-days of individual spot samples. Generally, we found
that the 24-h samples had less variability than the bootstrapped
samples, as measured by spread around the central tendency, a
lower 95th percentile, and a lower maximum concentration. When
studying this question with less ideal data sets (i.e., non-matching
24-h and random spot samples), we did find variability in long-
term samples that more closely matched the variability in spot
samples. Specifically, the spread of the interquartile range, and
the location of the 95th percentile and maximum concentration
in relation to the median, were similar in the German data on
phthalates and in the BPA data in children. This is probably
the extent of the observations one can make, given that the
long-term samples and spot samples came from different
populations.
In conclusion, the analysis here suggests that given the limited
data available to support such comparisons, concentrations of
phthalate metabolites and BPA in spot urine samples on a
population basis have variability reasonably comparable with 24-h
urine concentrations of the same compounds on a population
basis. This lends credibility to the use of spot sample surveys of
phthalates and BPA to infer roughly approximate distributions of
daily intakes within a population, and then to examine those
distributions for trends. The caveat we offer to this generality is
that caution should be exercised when using the high-end of spot
sample surveys to characterize a high-end of daily intakes,
particularly when the high-end of intakes appears close to health
and regulatory intake-based benchmarks.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to acknowledge Antonia M. Calafat (Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention) for provision of the Atlanta data and input during manuscript
preparation.
Disclaimer: This manuscript has been reviewed by the US
Environmental Protection Agency and approved for publication.
The views expressed in this manuscript are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views or policies of the US
Environmental Protection Agency.
REFERENCES
1 USEPA.. Guidelines for Exposure Assessment. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
Risk Assessment Forum, Washington, DC, 1992. Available at http://cfpub.epa.gov/
ncea/cfm/recordisplay.cfm?deid ¼ 1526EPA/600/Z-92/001.
2 Koch H.M., Bolt H.M., Preuss R., and Angerer J. New metabolites of di(2-
ethylhexyl)phthalate (DEHP) in human urine and serum after single oral doses of
deuterium-labelled DEHP. Arch Toxicol 2005: 79: 367--376.
3 Volkel W., Colnot T., Csanady G.A., Filser J.G., and Dekant W. Metabolism and
kinetics of bisphenol A in humans at low doses following oral administration.
Chem Res Toxicol 2002: 15: 1281--1287.
4 Volkel W., Bittner N., and Dekant W. Quantitation of bisphenol A and bisphenol A
glucuronide in biological samples by high performance liquid chromatography-
tandem mass spectrometry. Drug Metab Dispos 2005: 33: 1748--1757.
5 Kluwe W.M. Overview of phthalate ester pharmacokinetics in Mammalian-species.
Environ Health Perspect 1982: 45: 3--10.
6 Taylor J.A., vom Saal F.S., Welshons W.V., Drury B., Rottinghaus G., and Hunt P.A.,
et al. Similarity of bisphenol a pharmacokinetics in rhesus monkeys and mice:
relevance for human exposure. Environ Health Perspect 2011: 119: 422--430.
7 Koch H.M., and Calafat A.M. Human body burdens of chemicals used in plastic
manufacture. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2009: 364: 2063--2078.
8 Koch H.M., Drexler H., and Angerer J. An estimation of the daily intake of di(2-
ethylhexyl)phthalate (DEHP) and other phthalates in the general population. Int J
Hyg Environ Health 2003: 206: 77--83.
9 Koch H.M., Rossbach B., Drexler H., and Angerer J. Internal exposure of the general
population to DEHP and other phthalates - determination of secondary and
primary phthalate monoester metabolites in urine. Environ Res 2003: 93: 177--185.
10 Kutting B., Schettgen T., Schwegler U., Fromme H., Uter W.D., and Angerer J., et al.
Acrylamide as environmental noxious agent. A health risk assessment for the
general population based on the internal acrylamide burden. Int J Hyg Environ
Health 2009: 212: 470--480.
11 Wittassek M., Wiesmuller G.A., Koch H.M., Eckard R., Dobler L., and Muller J., et al.
Internal phthalate exposure over the last two decades - A retrospective human
biomonitoring study. Int J Hyg Environ Health 2007: 210: 319--333.
12 Preau J.L., Wong L.Y., Silva M.J., Needham L.L., and Calafat A.M. Variability over 1
week in the urinary concentrations of metabolites of diethyl phthalate and Di(2-
Ethylhexyl) phthalate among eight adults: an observational study. Environ Health
Perspect 2010: 118: 1748--1754.
13 Morgan M.K., Jones P.A., Calafat A.M., Ye X.Y., Croghan C.W., and Chuang J.C., et al.
Assessing the quantitative relationships between preschool children's exposures
to bisphenol A by route and urinary biomonitoring. Environ Sci Technol 2011: 45:
5309--5316.
14 Davison A.C., and Hinkley D.V. Bootstrap Methods and their Application. Cambridge
University Press: Cambridge, 1997.
15 SAS.. SAS/STATs 9.2 User's Guide. SAS Institute, Inc: Cary, NC, USA, 2008.
16 Frederiksen H., Aksglaede L., Sorensen K., Skakkebaek N., Juul A., and Andersson
A.M. Urinary excretion of phthalate metabolites in 129 healthy Danish children
and adolescents: estimation of daily phthalate intake. Environ Res 2011: 111: 656--663.
17 Li Z., Romanoff L.C., Lewin M.D., Porter E.N., Trinidad D.A., and Needham L.L., et al.
Variability of urinary concentrations of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon
metabolite in general population and comparison of spot, first-morning, and
24-h void sampling. J Expo Sci Environ Epidemiol 2010: 20: 526--535.
18 Scher D.P., Alexander B.H., Adgate J.L., Eberly L.E., Mandel J.S., and Acquavella J.F.,
et al. Agreement of pesticide biomarkers between morning void and 24-h urine
samples from farmers and their children. J Expo Sci Environ Epidemiol 2007: 17:
350--357.
19 Mahalingaiah S., Meeker J.D., Pearson K.R., Calafat A.M., Ye X., and Petrozza J., et al.
Temporal variability and predictors of urinary bisphenol a concentrations in men
and women. Environ Health Perspect 2008: 116: 173--178.
20 Teitelbaum S.L., Britton J.A., Calafat A.M., Ye X., Silva M.J., and Reidy J.A., et al.
Temporal variability in urinary concentrations of phthalate metabolites,
phytoestrogens and phenols among minority children in the United States.
Environ Res 2008: 106: 257--269.
21 Aylward L.L., Hays S.M., and Kirman C.P., Intra-Individual Variability in Phthalate
Spot Samples: Impact of Daily Dose Estimation. March 25, 2011. Prepared for,
Phthlate Esters Panel, American Chemistry Council, 700 Second St, NE,
Washington, DC 20002, available for download at http://www.cpsc.gov/about/
cpsia/chap0311.html1974.
22 Koch H.M., Wittassek M., Bruning T., Angerer J., and Heudorf U. Exposure to
phthalates in 5--6 years old primary school starters in Germany --- a human
biomonitoring study and a cumulative risk assessment. Article in press. Intern J
Hyg Environ Health 2011: 214: 188--195.
Supplementary Information accompanies the paper on the Journal of Exposure Science and Environmental Epidemiology website (http://
www.nature.com/jes)
Variability of phthalate, BPA concentrations
Christensen et al
640
Journal of Exposure Science and Environmental Epidemiology (2012), 632 -- 640 & 2012 Nature America, Inc.
